JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
Donald Trump wins big, and
Bernie Sanders
scores an upset, as the
presidential candidates
look ahead to Ohio and Florida.
GWEN IFILL: Also ahead this
Wednesday: An
American student is killed in
Israel amid
a spike in violence, and Vice
President Biden,
in a meeting with Prime Minister
Netanyahu
in Tel Aviv, sharply condemns
the violence.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And a Texas
hospital that is
bucking the trend, as more rural
health care
centers shut their doors.
DR. MICHAEL WILLIAMS, Former
CEO, Hill Country
Memorial: We took the approach
that, if we
took patients and we treated
them better than
they'd ever been treated before,
then, in
the end of the day, they would
drive the bottom
line.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more on
tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: This was another
day-after
for the presidential hopefuls.
Tuesday's results
focused even more attention on
tonight's latest
Democratic debate. And
Republicans issued
competing calls to join or
oppose the front-runner.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
I want to thank the people of
Michigan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Fresh from
another night of
triumph, Donald Trump appealed
today for mainstream
Republicans to unite behind him.
DONALD TRUMP: Instead of
fighting it, they
should embrace it. And if
everybody came together,
instead of spending all of this
money on these
ridiculous ads that frankly are
wrong, if
you -- and they're just false
ads. It's terrible.
If everybody came together,
nobody could beat
the Republican Party. We would
walk into Washington.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R-FL),
Presidential Candidate:
The momentum is with us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But Ted Cruz had
a decidedly
different take in Miami. He was
coming off
a win last night in Idaho's
Republican primary,
as well as second-place finishes
to Trump
in Michigan, Mississippi and
Hawaii, all the
more reason, Cruz said, for
Republicans dead
set against Trump to join him.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
There is only one campaign that
has demonstrated
it can beat Donald Trump over
and over and
over again, and we will beat
Donald Trump
over and over and over again.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: One former rival,
Carly Fiorina,
endorsed the Texas senator
today. And it was
widely reported that Jeb Bush
will meet with
the remaining Republican
hopefuls except for
Trump.
But it's getting harder by the
day to stop
the New York billionaire. After
last night,
Trump now has 458 delegates in
his column.
He needs to win almost 55
percent of the delegates
yet to be awarded to get to
1,237, the number
need to lock up the nomination.
Cruz, his
closest rival, is at 359.
Trailing far behind
are Marco Rubio, at 151, and
John Kasich,
who has 54.
The Ohio governor poured time
and resources
into neighboring Michigan, only
to come in
third there. Today, he brought
his campaign
and defiantly positive message
to Illinois,
where he hopes to do well on
March 15.
GOV. JOHN KASICH (R-OH),
Presidential Candidate:
Because I didn't engage in
name-calling, you
thought my name was governor of
Ohio, OK?
(LAUGHTER)
GOV. JOHN KASICH: And then about
a month ago,
or I wouldn't even say -- maybe
about two-and-a-half
or three weeks ago, you actually
started to
see who I was a little bit, and
now in the
last couple weeks, a heck of a
lot more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Even so, The
Chicago Tribune
passed over Kasich today and
endorsed Rubio,
who hasn't gotten much of a
boost so far out
of other endorsements. He failed
to score
any delegates in Michigan or
Mississippi,
and is pressing toward March 15,
when his
home state of Florida votes.
Tonight, Rubio
will be making his case in Miami
at a town
hall hosted by MSNBC.
The Democrats, meanwhile, are
pondering the
importance of their own results
from Tuesday.
Bernie Sanders tried today to
parlay his upset
win in Michigan into momentum
elsewhere.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
But, as the map moves forward,
and as we move,
for example, into the West,
California, Washington,
Arizona, Oregon, Wisconsin,
you're going to
see a lot of states where we
believe we have
an excellent chance to win.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Even with the
Michigan loss,
Hillary Clinton extended her
delegate lead
over Sanders last night. She won
more than
80 percent of the vote in
Mississippi's primary.
And she again focused on
opponents in Republican
ranks, instead of those in her
own.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
We have our differences, which
you can see
when we debate, but I will tell
you what.
Those differences pale in
comparison to what's
happening on the Republican
side.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Every
time you think
it can't get any uglier, they
find a way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The two Democrats
meet face-to-face
again tonight, this time in
Miami for a debate
hosted by the Spanish-language
network Univision.
We will call on two reporters
who've been
covering the races closely after
the news
summary.
GWEN IFILL: In the day's other
news: U.S.
special forces have captured the
Islamic State's
chemical weapons chief in
Northern Iraq. The
Associated Press reports he was
taken in a
raid last month. The report also
says follow-up
airstrikes have hit Islamic
State chemical
facilities in recent days.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And in Somalia,
there is word
that U.S. and Somali forces
killed 10 Al-Shabaab
militants in an overnight raid.
Somali intelligence
officials say the target was a
town controlled
by the group west of Mogadishu.
This comes
three days after U.S. airstrikes
hit an Al-Shabaab
camp. The Pentagon said up to
150 fighters
were killed there, but the
militants disputed
that figure.
GWEN IFILL: For the first time,
a Japanese
court has ordered a nuclear
reactor shut down
over safety concerns. Another
one already
down will have to stay offline.
The court
ruled the reactors nears Kyoto
have not been
adequately upgraded since the
Fukushima disaster.
But the Japanese government
disputed the finding.
YOSHIHIDE SUGA, Japanese Chief
Cabinet Secretary
(through translator): An
independent regulatory
committee, including
professionals and architects,
spent a lot of time to come up
with the decision
that the reactors are up to top
world-level
standards. The government backs
that decision
and has not changed its stance
of restarting
the reactors.
GWEN IFILL: Japan shut down all
of its nuclear
power plants after a tsunami
severely damaged
the Fukushima plant five years
ago this week.
The government has now begun
slowly restarting
some of the plants.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tributes came in
from around
the music world today for George
Martin, the
legendary record producer of the
Beatles.
He gave the group their first
break in 1962,
and guided them through the
decade as they
revolutionized pop music.
Beatles biographer Philip Norman
spoke to
Independent Television News
today.
PHILIP NORMAN, Beatles
Biographer: He was
a musician, as well as a
producer. He saw
the real talent in John Lennon
and Paul McCartney,
and he really devoted himself to
sort of making
it sound as good as it could. He
became a
celebrity producer, although he
didn't want
to be a celebrity.
JUDY WOODRUFF: George Martin was
90 years
old.
GWEN IFILL: Back in this
country, a period
of official mourning began for
former first
lady Nancy Reagan, who died
Sunday at the
age of 94. Mrs. Reagan's casket
was brought
to her husband's presidential
library in Simi
Valley, California, where the
public viewing
began. She will lie in repose
until the funeral,
set for Friday.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wall Street
managed modest
gains today. The Dow Jones
industrial average
was up 36 points to close at
17000. The Nasdaq
rose 25 points, and the S&P 500
added 10.
GWEN IFILL: And score another
breakthrough
for artificial intelligence. A
computer program
designed by Google has beaten
one of the world's
top players in Go, the ancient
Chinese board
game. The computer relayed moves
to a human
stand-in as it squared off
against the 18-time
world champion in South Korea.
Afterward, he praised the
program. The game
involves roughly 200 possible
moves per turn,
compared to 20 in chess.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
beyond the
rhetoric, the facts about Trump
University;
a rural hospital beats the odds
and keeps
its doors open; new turmoil in
the Middle
East, and the White House
response, and much
more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: From Trump's
latest triumph,
to the surprise win for Sanders
in Michigan,
we explore the state of the race
for the White
House, as the focus heads to the
battleground
states of Ohio and Florida.
Joining us again are Reid Wilson
of the Morning
Consult and Susan Page of USA
Today.
And we welcome you both back to
the program.
Reid, let me start with you.
Let's start with the
Republicans. Donald Trump
is blazing ahead, despite the
onslaught that
he faced last week, the Mitt
Romney news conference,
the money that the stop Trump
movement is
spending. How significant is
this?
REID WILSON, Morning Consult:
And another
round of pundit saying he has
hit the wall
and is about to start his
decline. Instead,
last night, in a couple of
contests, in four
contests around the country,
Donald Trump
grew his delegate lead.
Now, the real onslaught, the
real test he
faces comes next week in
Florida, where outside
groups are spending millions of
dollars, multiple
millions of dollars attacking
him from all
sides. We will see whether or
not he can survive.
But, at the moment, he remains
the Republican
front-runner. And for the rest
of the anti-Trump
Republican field, their best
shot at stopping
him remains in some kind of
contested convention
once we get to Cleveland in
July.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Susan, how do you
size up where
Trump is right now?
SUSAN PAGE, Washington Bureau
Chief, USA Today:
I think Trump could end up with
enough delegates,
the 1,237 he would need to hold
the nomination.
But -- and I think the only path
that his
opponents have now is to get --
to go to a
contested convention, which is a
long shot,
possible perhaps for the long
shot. I mean,
it's remarkable. He is a guy who
has never
ran for office before. He had a
record size
field of 17 competitors. And
he's now clearly
the front-runner.
He has dominated the field from
the beginning
of the contest. And one big name
in Republican
politics after another has
fallen at his feet,
the latest being Marco Rubio.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Reid, what did we
see in the
interviews with voters as they
were leaving
the polls yesterday in these
states that voted,
the so-called exit polls? What
did they say
about Trump, that he should
either be happy
about or worried about as he
goes into these
big states?
REID WILSON: The two things that
strike me
most from the Republican exit
polls is, one,
the amazing amount of support
Trump gets from
people who say they want a
candidate who tells
it like it is. Trump wins
something like three-quarters
of those voters across states,
not just Michigan
and Mississippi, but beginning
in Iowa and
now all the way through until
where we are
today.
The second is that Trump has
this well of
supporters who have been with
him from the
very beginning. Susan mentioned
it, that he's
been ahead since the beginning.
And if you
look at the exit polls, the
people who have
decided how they were going to
vote months
ago, weeks ago have all decided
for Trump.
The people who are just now
deciding are deciding
for some other candidate.
More and more, by the way, bad
news for Marco
Rubio, the people who are
deciding to vote
late are deciding to vote for
Ted Cruz.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What else do you
see, Susan,
in the reasons people are
deciding to go Trump
or somebody else?
SUSAN PAGE: These are people who
think the
country is headed in the wrong
direction,
that the political leadership in
both parties
has failed to address it, and
they're ready
to shake things up.
And that's one reason I think
the attacks
on Trump that he's not
consistently conservative
or that he's lying about his
business record,
it just doesn't seem to have
much of an effect
with his voters. Last night, as
we have seen
before, his support was mostly
male -- more
male than female, almost
entirely white, strongest
among working-class voters, but
the fact is,
he has very broad support.
He continues to win white
evangelicals over
Ted Cruz. And that is Ted Cruz's
base.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Reid, begin
to outline
for us what these candidates
face, the Republicans
face in Florida, in Ohio, in
Illinois and
the other states that vote on
Tuesday.
REID WILSON: So, they face some
pretty high
stakes, similar to what Ted Cruz
faced on
Super Tuesday, when his home
state of Texas
was the prize plum on the tree.
This time, we have got Marco
Rubio's home
state of Florida, John Kasich's
home state
of Ohio. Both are
winner-take-all states,
which means that there are a big
chunk of
delegates. No more of this 25
delegates for
Trump, 17 for Rubio, 17 for
Kasich. All 99
of Florida's delegates will go
to a person
who gets a plurality there. All
of Ohio's
delegates will go to the person
who gets a
plurality there.
The great news for Donald Trump
is that he's
leading in both states. He's
leading John
Kasich in Ohio by a smaller
margin than he's
leading Marco Rubio in Florida,
but, as I
said, he is facing millions of
dollars in
negative ads, a kind of
consistent attack
that he has not faced yet.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just quickly,
Susan, is
there something we know about
the electorate
in -- Republican electorate in
these states
that these candidates should be
watching out
for?
SUSAN PAGE: Well, they are.
There are candidates
-- there are states that will
know some of
these candidates well, which
ought to be good
news for them.
And it's in Florida in
particular. It's a
state where an endorsement by
Jeb Bush, which
probably wouldn't matter much
nationally,
could matter. He's a popular
former governor
there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Susan, let's
start now on the
Democrats. Bernie Sanders wasn't
supposed
to win Michigan. He did. How big
a deal is
it?
SUSAN PAGE: You know, this saved
Bernie Sanders,
because he was just on the verge
of being
counted out as a credible
nominee and thought
of as only a protest candidate,
candidate
with a message.
But he's turned that around by
-- all the
polls showed him with a
double-digit deficit
in Michigan. He managed to win
there, and
he managed to continue to -- he
turned out
a lot of young people. He won
eight out of
10 voters under 30. That is a
huge advantage
for him and one that Hillary has
just been
unable to cut into. And he did
better among
black voters than he's done
before, and in
fact was basically even with her
among black
voters under 40.
That could be important, too.
It's a bigger,
more diverse state than he's won
in before
and one that is not in his
neighborhood, and
that made this especially
important.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We noticed she
didn't do as
good among black voters in
Michigan as she
has done with African-American
voters in the
South.
Reid, what else is there that
Hillary Clinton
should be worried after this
Michigan result?
REID WILSON: There are a couple
of things.
The Clinton coalition at the
moment is Democratic
voters who want a candidate who
is electable
and experienced. The Sanders
coalition is
people who want a candidate who
shares my
values and who cares about
people like me.
If you get to the general
election and the
majority of Democrats or a
significant part
-- number of Democrats don't
believe that
Hillary Clinton is honest or
trustworthy,
that's going to be a big, big
problem down
the line for her.
I mean, this is -- the last
Democratic president
before President Obama was the
guy who felt
your pain, and now Hillary
Clinton, not Bill
Clinton, is having trouble
connecting with
voters.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Susan, we
talked about
what the Republicans face in
Ohio and Florida
and so forth next Tuesday. What
about the
Democrats? What about Clinton
and Sanders?
SUSAN PAGE: Crucial as well,
because these
big states voting, they don't --
they're not
winner-take-all states, because
Democratic
rules don't allow that.
But you talked about the
problems that Hillary
Clinton saw last night. And
let's talk about
the advantages she saw last
night. The momentum
was with Sanders. The math is
with Clinton.
Even though Clinton got defeated
in a state
she hoped to win, she ends up
with more delegates
last night than Sanders because
she won in
Mississippi by such a big
margin.
She got four times more
delegates from Mississippi
than Sanders got out of
Michigan. And that
was certainly something that her
campaign
manager, Robby Mook, was trying
to make with
reporters today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And this is
something peculiar
to the Democratic -- it's
something the Democratic
Party worked because they wanted
it to work
this way.
SUSAN PAGE: They wanted
proportional representation.
Republicans are less devoted to
that idea.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just quickly,
Reid.
REID WILSON: Hillary Clinton is
still on the
path still to the Democratic
nomination, but
the path is more of a marathon.
Had she won
both states last night, it would
have been
more of a 5K or a 10K.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Susan, you were
saying it could
take even longer for her to seal
this than
for Donald Trump.
SUSAN PAGE: And who would have
thought that
In this big Republican field,
that gets settled
before this presumptive
front-runner who had
-- we thought was going to be
mostly token
opposition. It's amazing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Susan Page, Reid
Wilson, thank
you both.
REID WILSON: Thanks a lot.
SUSAN PAGE: Thanks.
GWEN IFILL: On the campaign
trail, Donald
Trump often boasts of his
business credentials
to be president, never more than
during a
victory speech last night in
Jupiter, Florida,
held at one of his hotels.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
I built a great, great company.
I have very
low debt. I have assets like
this. This is
owned 100 percent by me with no
debt.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP: You look at Doral,
where we
just had the major championship,
I mean, I
have a lot of things in Florida,
partners
with related or numerous jobs on
the beach,
very successful, partners with
Gil and Michael
Dezer on the beach, massive
buildings.
Nobody ever talks about this
stuff, and, you
know, many, many jobs in New
York, including
the city on the West Side from
72nd to 59th
Street, or on the Hudson River,
one of the
most successful projects ever
built in real
estate.
GWEN IFILL: But one of Mr.
Trump's ventures
has come under especially harsh
scrutiny in
recent years.
John Yang explores.
JOHN YANG: Trump University was
promoted as
a way for aspiring real estate
developers
to learn the business from top
instructors.
As many as 7,000 people signed
up, paying
an estimated $40 million in
fees.
The now-defunct for-profit
seminars are the
subject of three lawsuits, one
brought by
the state of New York, and two
class-action
suits in California brought by
former students
who say they were defrauded,
because the high-priced
classes didn't deliver on the
promises.
Investigative reporter Michael
Isikoff has
been looking into this for Yahoo
News, and
he joins us now from New York.
Michael, welcome.
MICHAEL ISIKOFF, Yahoo News:
Good to be with
you, John.
JOHN YANG: Michael, we talk
about the promises
and what they lived up to.
They offered handpicked
instructors, handpicked
by Donald Trump, and access to
Trump secrets.
Now, you talked to students who
took these
classes. What do they say
actually happened?
MICHAEL ISIKOFF: Well, they say
they didn't'
get their money's worth.
You know, in the promotional
literature, there
was language from Trump about
how he would
teach them to make a living --
make a killing
-- I'm sorry -- in the real
estate market,
he would teach his secrets to
them, they would
learn from the best of the best.
And what Trump University turned
out to be
was a series of ballroom
seminars where people
got sort of basics from these
instructors,
and then they were encouraged to
put more
money down, to max out their
credit cards
to the tune of $35,000, to pay
for mentoring
from these handpicked experts of
Donald Trump.
And many of those who have filed
complaints
with the Better Business Bureau,
with the
state of New York, with other
attorneys generals
say they got very little for
that. The handpicked
experts seemed to know very
little about thee
real estate business, gave them
bum advice,
and in many cases seemed to fade
away and
they were unable to even get in
touch with
them.
So you had a lot of angry
consumers out there
who have brought these lawsuits.
JOHN YANG: Were you able to talk
to any students
who were satisfied? Donald
Trump, of course,
said that there were course
evaluations. People
said they were very satisfied.
His attorneys
say the same thing. Were you
able to talk
to any students who said that?
MICHAEL ISIKOFF: I didn't
personally talk
to students who fit into that
category.
The evaluation forms basically
were based
-- came off the seminars, which
were just
a couple of hours and sort of
routine forms
that were handed out at the
time. The real
complaints came afterwards from
those who
went through the process of this
mentoring,
and that's where they say they
didn't get
their money's worth.
Now, I'm sure we will hear in
the upcoming
trial -- and it is important to
note that
there is a trial scheduled for
this year on
this matter -- from people who
will testify
that they did have good
experiences with Trump
University.
But Trump's lawyers have tried
to make that
point in a number of motions in
these cases,
and the -- those motions for
summary judgment
to have these suits thrown out
have so far
being unsuccessful.
JOHN YANG: On the campaign
trail, Marco Rubio
and Ted Cruz are trying to make
this a campaign
issue, a political issue, but
the trial or
the court cases is moving
forward. What's
the status of that case?
MICHAEL ISIKOFF: Yes. Well,
actually, I happened
to stumble across the filings
just a couple
of weeks ago that kind of put
this in play.
These lawsuits have been going
on for several
years now. They were originally
filed back
in 2010. And I -- after the --
Trump's lawyers
lost their motion on summary
judgment, there
suddenly popped up just a couple
of weeks
ago references to, first, a
deposition that
Trump had been -- given in a
case just last
December, and then also
references to pretrial
conference, getting ready for
trial, witness
lists exchanged.
And on those witness lists,
Donald Trump stands
front and center. The last
pretrial conference
is May 6, and then the
expectations are that
the case will move to trial in
August, which,
curiously enough, is just a few
weeks after
the Republican Convention.
JOHN YANG: And he's fighting the
judge in
this case, is he not?
MICHAEL ISIKOFF: Yes.
Well, as I mentioned before,
he's lost -- his
lawyers have lost their attempts
to have the
cases thrown out. And Donald
Trump in one
of his recent interviews and in
a campaign
appearance said, this is because
the judge
is biased against him.
Why does he believe the judge is
biased against
him? Because the judge, Gonzalo
Curiel, the
federal judge, been on the bench
a number
of years, is Hispanic, and Trump
believes
because of his stance about
building a wall
in Mexico, this has caused the
judge to be
biased against him in the Trump
University
lawsuit. And he indicated he may
file a motion
to have the judge recused.
I don't know that having a judge
recused based
on his or her ethnicity is going
to carry
muster, though.
JOHN YANG: Well, Michael, I'm
sure this is
not going to be the last we talk
about this
or hear about this.
Michael Isikoff, thanks for
joining us.
MICHAEL ISIKOFF: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Last week, we
brought you a
story about the many rural
communities in
the country affected by a recent
wave of hospital
closures.
Tonight, special correspondent
Sarah Varney
takes us to Fredericksburg,
Texas, population
10,000, where a hospital is
bucking that trend.
Its turnaround is seen as a
model for other
rural hospitals struggling to
keep their doors
open.
This story was produced in
collaboration with
our partner Kaiser Health News.
BRAD KOTT, Fredericksburg,
Texas: This is
the picture we really love.
SARAH VARNEY: Brad and Sheryl
Kott didn't
think much of it seven years
ago, when their
13-year-old son, Quinn, a
friendly, energetic
athlete complained he wasn't
feeling well.
But soon after, Quinn collapsed
on the bathroom
floor, and his speech was
garbled.
BRAD KOTT: We loaded him in the
back of our
pickup in the second seat, and
we start heading
to town to the emergency room
right away.
And on the way, my wife said, I
think he's
had a stroke.
SARAH VARNEY: After the family
arrived at
Hill Country Memorial Hospital
in Fredericksburg,
the Kotts say Quinn's medical
care went terribly
wrong. They waited in the E.R.
for hours.
And the Kotts say the nurses and
E.R. doctor
were unattentive and callous, at
one point
deciding to send Quinn home. His
mother refused.
SHERYL KOTT, Fredericksburg,
Texas: I met
the doctor coming down the hall,
and I said,
something is wrong with Quinn.
And he shushed
me, because he didn't want
anybody else to
hear me. And I said, no, don't
you tell me
to shush. You're the doctor. I'm
the mom.
There's something wrong with my
son, and I
need to know what's wrong with
my son, and
we are not taking him home.
SARAH VARNEY: It wasn't until
the next morning
that a pediatrician finally
examined Quinn.
He was rushed to a hospital in
San Antonio
and died soon after. He had had
a massive
stroke.
For Dr. Michael Williams, then
Hill Country
Memorial's CEO, Quinn's death in
2009 was
a crucible moment.
DR. MICHAEL WILLIAMS, Former
CEO, Hill Country
Memorial: We had a clear
opportunity to do
either do what most hospitals
do, and what
we had done previously, which
was get our
attorneys involved, be prepared
for a lawsuit,
take on a defensive mode, try to
really guard
ourselves, or we could take a
different approach
and work directly, reach out to
the family
and ask them to partner with us
in really
transforming the hospital.
SARAH VARNEY: In truth, says Dr.
Williams,
who is now president of the
University of
North Texas Health Science
Center in Fort
Worth, the hospital's problems
went well beyond
the E.R.
DR. MICHAEL WILLIAMS: The
hospital was in
the red on an annual basis. The
patient satisfaction
was very low. The employee
satisfaction was
very low. And across the board,
what we heard
from people was that this used
to be the community's
hospital, and now people are
leaving the community
to go get their care elsewhere.
SARAH VARNEY: The troubled
hospital in Fredericksburg
was caught up in larger forces.
Since 2010,
more than 50 rural hospitals
have closed across
the country and hundreds more
are at risk.
Rural populations have declined.
And in many
places, those that remain are
largely elderly
or uninsured. At the same time,
congressional
budget agreements and the
Affordable Care
Act receded Medicare
reimbursement and subsidies
for the uninsured, revenue
losses that many
rural hospitals have been unable
to withstand.
Deep in the Texas Hill Country,
the hospital
in Fredericksburg was poised to
face a similar
a fate. Despite the area's live
music scene
and strong tourist economy, the
hospital was
the town's largest employer, and
cherished
for much of its history.
When it opened in 1971, 93
percent of the
county's households contributed
money, and
thousands of people lined up to
have a first
look. Years later, as the
hospital faced the
crisis of Quinn Kott's death,
Dr. Williams
was determined to bring back
that spirit.
He studied the Toyota plant in
San Antonio,
and hired former Toyota employee
Jeff Darnaby
to help bring the car company's
revered assembly
line principles to Hill Country
Memorial.
JEFF DARNABY, Hill Country
Memorial: The Toyota
production system basically
allows you to
identify waste, and remove that
waste from
your processes. Anything that
doesn't add
value to the customer, to the
process is considered
waste.
SARAH VARNEY: Today, at Hill
Country Memorial,
each department candidly
displays specific
goals for everyone to see,
reduce E.R. wait
times, eliminate falls, and
improve customer
satisfaction.
JEFF DARNABY: This is based off
the top five
board that we brought here from
Toyota. We
didn't meet this goal yesterday.
Here's where
we're working on today, so I
know I need to
get in this role.
SARAH VARNEY: And this isn't
something that's
just measured once a year or
every quarter.
These are sort of real-time
feedback.
JEFF DARNABY: Yes, it could be
down to daily
-- daily tracking and reporting.
SARAH VARNEY: In addition to
Toyota, Dr. Williams
turned to a former executive
with Southwest
Airlines to remake the
hospital's values and
culture, and he hired a former
trainer from
Ritz-Carlton, known for its
legendary customer
service, to change how patients
and families
were treated.
DR. MICHAEL WILLIAMS: We took
the approach
that, if we took patients and we
treated them
better than they'd ever been
treated before,
then, in the end of the day,
they would drive
the bottom line.
SARAH VARNEY: Seven years after
Quinn's death,
Hill Country Memorial now ranks
among the
top 100 hospitals in the
country, and recently
won the nation's highest
presidential honor
for excellence through
innovation and leadership.
The sweeping changes can be seen
everywhere,
from smaller efforts like
reducing food waste
in the kitchen...
MAN: I have problem. I have my
cholesterol,
high cholesterol.
SARAH VARNEY: To helping local
workers like
Domingo Gallegos get healthier
with free nutrition
counseling and access to the
hospital's wellness
center, and to more far-reaching
initiatives
planned out in the hospital's
so-called war
room, where new ventures are
hatched to improve
care and grow the business.
WOMAN: A lot of patients come to
class thinking
they're going to cut out this
much of my leg.
SARAH VARNEY: To capitalize on
the abundance
of Medicare- insured retirees in
Texas Hill
Country, the hospital developed
a well-regarded
hip and knee replacement.
WOMAN: Total knee replacement
means they're
resurfacing both sides of the
knee.
SARAH VARNEY: That program that
has attracted
patients like George Brannies.
At 72, Brannies
is a fifth-generation Texan from
nearby Mason.
He's a rancher and chairman of
the local bank.
After a riding accident a few
years ago, Brannies
sought care from a renowned
surgeon in San
Antonio. When the hip surgery
failed, he decided
to try Hill Country Memorial.
Brannies says
his surgeon and nurses were so
exceptional
that he was back on his horse in
four weeks.
GEORGE BRANNIES, Patient: They
take such good
care of you. It's like doing
business at in
a small-town bank. They give you
their cell
numbers. They say, now, if you
have a problem,
you call us. Try this with one
of those big
city hospitals. Yes, it doesn't
happen..
SARAH VARNEY: The hospital now
performs some
400 hip and knee surgeries a
year, and markets
its nationally recognized
program well beyond
Texas Hill Country.
Jayne Pope became CEO of Hill
Country Memorial
in 2013. She attributes much of
the hospital's
success to its fervent and
never-ending focus
on improving patient care,
efforts, Pope says,
that don't need to cost a lot of
money.
JAYNE POPE, CEO, Hill Country
Memorial: We
know, as a rural center, we
can't do everything.
But what we do is determine what
those core
competencies are, and we invest
in those skills,
so that our patients have the
best of care.
SARAH VARNEY: But not every
rural hospital
can replicate Hill Country
Memorial's success.
Len Nichols, a health economist
at George
Mason University, says many
small towns simply
can't sustain an acute care
hospital.
LEN NICHOLS, George Mason
University: We probably
have roughly 20 to 30 percent
more hospitals
beds than we actually need. And
so who's going
to lose in the long run? Well,
it's going
to be those hospitals that are
the least efficient,
those who cannot deliver good
quality services
for the lowest possible cost.
SARAH VARNEY: Instead, says
Nichols, the dozens
of rural hospitals that have
closed and hundreds
more at risk should consider
converting to
urgent care centers and
partnering with larger
regional hospitals. That would
allow rural
residents to be stabilized and
moved quickly
to hospitals where doctors often
have more
expertise.
Brad and Sheryl Kott say the
changes at Hill
Country Memorial came too late
for their family.
They're still haunted by the
treatment their
son Quinn received and the
hospital's ad campaign
that trumpets its care as
remarkable.
BRAD KOTT: At first, it makes me
sick to my
stomach, because the hospital
wasn't remarkable
at all. And it just -- it tears
at you when
you see a billboard that says
that. However,
I know that it has transformed
into -- into
that.
And it makes me proud that
people in my community
took a bad situation, took our
tragedy and
worked to turn it around.
SARAH VARNEY: For the "PBS
NewsHour" and Kaiser
Health News, I'm Sarah Varney in
Fredericksburg,
Texas.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can watch
the first
part of this series that
explores the struggles
hospitals in rural Georgia are
facing on our
Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
GWEN IFILL: Vice President Biden
met with
Israeli and Palestinian leaders
today amid
a deadly spike in attacks in
Israel.
Yesterday, an American war
veteran and student,
Taylor Force, was killed in
Jaffa during a
series of stabbings. Today,
after meeting
with Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu, Biden
condemned the attacks and the
apparent celebration
of the tactic by Palestinian
President Mahmoud
Abbas' political party.
JOSEPH BIDEN, Vice President of
the United
States: The kind of violence we
saw yesterday,
the failure to condemn it, the
rhetoric that
incites that violence, the
retribution that
it generates, has to stop. There
can't be
-- there cannot be unilateral
steps to undermine
trust that only takes us further
away -- further
and further away from an
outcome.
GWEN IFILL: The vice president
also responded
to Iran's test launch of
ballistic missiles
capable of reaching Israel. The
Israeli government
has strongly opposed the
U.S.-brokered nuclear
deal reached with Iran last
summer.
Biden today said, if Iran were
to break the
deal -- quote -- "We will act."
I'm joined now by Daniel Estrin
in Jerusalem,
who's covering the story for the
Associated
Press.
Daniel, we have seen months and
months of
these stabbing attacks,
especially horrific.
What's behind them?
DANIEL ESTRIN, Associated Press:
That's a
good question.
Palestinians say that it's the
Israeli military
occupation of the Palestinian
territories,
a desperation, that there seems
to be no solution
and no end if sight, and no hope
for a future
for them.
Israeli officials say that this
is a Palestinian
campaign of incitement and lies
fueled by
social media. And you see a lot,
especially
today on Twitter. The Fatah
Party, the political
party of Palestinian President
Mahmoud Abbas,
posted a photo of a cartoon
basically extolling
the stabber that stabbed the
American student.
GWEN IFILL: Was there any
concern that the
latest attacks were coordinated
to happen
at the same time as Vice
President Biden's
arrival?
DANIEL ESTRIN: There's no sense
of that here
in Israel. And Israeli defense
officials have
said that this is just a part of
the months
of violence that we have seen
here almost
every day.
GWEN IFILL: We have watched
carefully here
in the U.S. the strained
relations often between
the U.S. administration and the
Israeli government.
Does Vice President Biden's
strong words today
condemning the Palestinians for
failing to
respond, does that go -- was
that designed,
or can we tell, to heal that
rift?
DANIEL ESTRIN: Well, it's
interesting.
Joe Biden mentioned today on the
cameras that
he has had a very long
relationship with Prime
Minister Netanyahu, going back
decades. He
said he wasn't here in Israel
with a certain
plan, a certain peace plan, but
he was here
to speak with his good friend
Netanyahu. His
relationship is a lot better
with Netanyahu
than President Obama's
relationship is.
And so I think the idea here is
that he is
trying to see if there's any
chance of any
opening on both sides to move
forward.
GWEN IFILL: Is that complicated
by this Iranian
missile test? Obviously, Israel
has no love
lost for Iran, and the U.S., to
Israel's point
of view, has accommodated them
too much.
Did that -- does that make for
greater tension?
DANIEL ESTRIN: Yes, this is one
of the main
issues looming over the vice
president's visit
in Israel, the Iranian deal and
specifically
what America is going to do for
Israel now.
And America promised Israel
after it brokered
the nuclear deal with Iran that
it would give
it some kind of compensation,
some kind of
boost in military aid. And now
there are negotiations
between the two countries. The
U.S. is offering
a lower number than -- a lower
amount than
the Israelis want. Currently,
America gives
Israel about $3 billion a year
in military
aid.
Aides to the prime minister,
Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu, have
insinuated in recent
weeks that Netanyahu's attitude
is, thanks,
but no thanks, Obama
administration. We will
wait for the next
administration.
And according to Israeli media
today, the
vice president told Netanyahu,
take the deal.
You're not going to get a better
one.
GWEN IFILL: So, the Israeli
government reaction
to the Iranian missile test has
been what?
DANIEL ESTRIN: Well, it took the
Israelis
a long time actually today
before they put
out a statement just this
evening here.
The Israeli Foreign Ministry
said it was dangerous,
the testing of the ballistic
missiles in Iran.
They said these missiles not
only can reach
Israel, but they have the
capability of carrying
a nuclear warhead. And Israel
said this is
just another sign that Iran is
not serious
about curbing its nuclear
program.
GWEN IFILL: And, finally, as a
backdrop to
all of this, there has been a
teachers strike,
a Palestinian teachers strike,
and children
have not been in school for some
time. Does
that also add to the
complications that we're
seeing?
DANIEL ESTRIN: It's interesting.
These strikes that have been
happening over
the last month are some of the
biggest strikes
that we have seen in the West
Bank in years.
They're about teachers' wages,
but they're
more than that. They're about
challenging
Abbas' rule and frustration
about Abbas' leadership.
There's just a general malaise
and frustration
about where things are going in
the West Bank.
Abbas, the president, is not
very popular
at all in the West Bank, and
this definitely
adds a lot of complications,
when Israel and
the U.S. are asking the
Palestinian leadership
to step up and to condemn
certain attacks.
The violence that we have seen
over the past
six months almost has a lot of
support on
the Palestinian street,
according to polls
here. And so Abbas is really in
a tough spot.
He's against violence, but it's
hard for him
to speak out against it.
GWEN IFILL: Daniel Estrin in
Jerusalem for
the Associated Press, thank you
so much.
DANIEL ESTRIN: You're welcome.
GWEN IFILL: We will be back to
speak with
the former head of the American
Academy of
Pediatrics about why doctors
should be screening
children for poverty.
But, first, take this moment to
hear from
your local PBS station. It's a
chance to offer
your support, which helps keep
programs like
ours on the air.
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: Finally, new
guidelines are out
today from the American Academy
of Pediatrics.
They recommend that, during
routine checkups,
physicians also screen children
for poverty.
Hari Sreenivasan has that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Census figures
show one
in five children in the country
lives in poverty,
which can contribute to higher
rates of asthma
and obesity, poor language
development, and
increased infant mortality.
The new guidelines encourage
doctors to ask
patients about basic needs, such
as food,
heat and housing during
well-child visits,
and to help them connect with
community resources
that might be of help.
Dr. Renee Jenkins is a former
president of
the American Academy of
Pediatrics who currently
teaches at Howard University
Medical School,
and joins me now.
Dr. Jenkins, what does it mean
to screen for
poverty?
DR. RENEE JENKINS, Former
President, American
Academy of Pediatrics: So, there
are now tools
that help us in the office when
we do well-checks
to really ask parents about food
insecurity,
housing insecurity, whether
their young children
are in childhood educational
situations, like
Head Start or Early Head Start,
because we
recognize that if we can
intervene early on,
very often, we can make a
difference.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, I know
people are very
comfortable sharing confidential
information
with their doctors, but how do
you start this
conversation, and do people open
up to you
about it?
DR. RENEE JENKINS: Right.
Generally, we start with
something very broad,
like, do you have any problem
making ends
meet, OK, and does this happen
often or does
it just happen sometimes?
And then that opens up a
conversation about
what some of the issues might
be. And I think
we are trying to -- what we're
recommending
is that we screen everyone. We
ask an very
open-ended question like that
and then we
see where that takes us.
I'm sure some people are going
to be uncomfortable
to start to do that, but I think
once patients
understand that, each time I
come, they're
going to ask me something like
that, because
it's a common problem. And as
you mentioned,
you know, one in five children
is living if
poverty.
And if it weren't for the safety
programs,
safety net programs that we
have, it would
be even more children. So we're
just trying
to connect parents to the safety
net programs.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, how solid
are the links
between poverty and adverse
health outcomes?
What does the research show?
DR. RENEE JENKINS: The research
shows that
there really are.
We have known for quite a long
time about
the relationship, for example,
with asthma
and poor housing, OK? We have
also known about
nutrition and how, when you're
poor, you tend
to buy cheaper foods. Healthy
foods are pretty
expensive. And so in order to
make the food
last for the entire month, you
have got to
do that.
So we have always known that.
But there is
new information now about the
stressors that
children go through when they're
in poverty
and how these stressors do
handicap them in
terms of their developmental
milestones.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, you're
also talking
about longer-term issues.
From the report, you talk about
gene expression,
brain function, language
development and possible
leads to psychiatric disorder.
All of that
comes from childhood poverty?
DR. RENEE JENKINS: Well, poverty
certainly
contributes to it.
But when you take the big
picture and you
look at what's happening within
the neighborhood
that these poor children may
live in and those
kind of safe -- unsafe issues,
as well as
the stressor on parents,
parents, you know,
want to provide the best for
their children.
And when they can't, that's
stressful for
them, also.
Very often, there are not the
same sort of
ways that we relax when you are
someone who
has resources. People who are
poor can't do
that. And so they don't have
ways to necessarily
relieve the stresses that are
associated with
their living conditions.
So we have got stressed parents,
and obviously,
it impact the child.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, what
you're describing
is a much greater role for a
pediatrician
to play now. It's almost like
they're doing
some of the things that a social
worker traditionally
does in connecting needs with
resources.
DR. RENEE JENKINS: That's true,
but I think
now there are -- there is more
availability.
DR. RENEE JENKINS: That's true,
but I think
now there are -- there is more
availability.
We have the Internet, where
there are lots of resources. We
have Web sites.
There are 800-phone numbers, and
so the recommendations
are not to try to tackle all of
it. OK? What
we want people to do is, where
is your comfort
are not to try to tackle all of
it. OK? What
we want people to do is, where
is your comfort
level? Is your comfort level the
nutrition,
so you can get your patients
connected with
level? Is your comfort level the
nutrition,
so you can get your patients
connected with
the WIC program, Women, Infant
and Children, or with the food
stamp program?
the WIC program, Women, Infant
and Children, or with the food
stamp program?
Or is your comfort level
housing, so that
you can refer someone to a
resource for that?
Or is your comfort level
housing, so that
you can refer someone to a
resource for that?
So, we're not asking people to
do it all,
but we're saying, you know, we
can make a
So, we're not asking people to
do it all,
but we're saying, you know, we
can make a
difference, we can start small,
and, you know,
here are some guidelines and
here are some
difference, we can start small,
and, you know,
here are some guidelines and
here are some
screening tools that you can use
to do that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, Dr.
Renee Jenkins,
thanks so much.
DR. RENEE JENKINS: You're quite
welcome. Thank
you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online: Today
marks 121 years since the death
of Dr. Rebecca
Lee Crumpler, the country's
first African-American
woman physician. Medical
historian Dr. Howard
Lee Crumpler, the country's
first African-American
woman physician. Medical
historian Dr. Howard
Markel writes about her
remarkable story of
courage and perseverance.
Markel writes about her
remarkable story of
courage and perseverance.
And an 87-year-old World War II
survivor shares
her story of being a young
refugee with a
And an 87-year-old World War II
survivor shares
her story of being a young
refugee with a
16-year-old Syrian girl who has
also left
her homeland. You can read about
the program
that connected the two on our
home page.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
GWEN IFILL: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Thursday: When will the lid
come off? Making
Sense of how the Fed will handle
interest
rates.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.